THE EVOLUTION OF LATIN
AMERICAN LITERATURE
HAS FOLLOWED A COMPLEX
AND TWISTING PATH,
NOT UNLIKE THE
EVOLVING HISTORY
OF THE CONTINENT
ITSELF.
AT ITS CORE, THE PROGRAM
OF THE LITERATURE
IS TO ESTABLISH
AND DEFINE
A CULTURAL AND
SOCIAL IDENTITY.
THE WEST INDIES,
AMERICA, THE NEW WORLD
- EACH OF THESE NAMES
ATTEMPTED TO ENCAPSULATE
THIS NEW REALITY AS
IT WAS BEING SHAPED.
THE PRE-HISPANIC WORLD
AND ITS LITERATURE
SUFFERED AN IRREPARABLE
RUPTURE FROM ITS PAST
WITH THE ARRIVAL OF
EUROPEAN CONQUISTADORS.
THIS EVENT GAVE
RISE TO A NEW GENRE:
THE CHRONICLES
OF THE INDIES.
*
INTERMINGLING THE
EXPERIENCE OF THE
NEW WORLD WITH THE
LANGUAGE AND TRADITION
OF THE OLD, LATIN-AMERICAN
LITERATURE STANDS IN A
COMPLEX RELATIONSHIP OF
IMITATION, INNOVATION,
AND ANTAGONISM WITH
ITS EUROPEAN PARENTAGE.
THIS DYNAMIC CHANGED
RADICALLY IN THE PERIOD
BETWEEN THE
END OF THE 18TH
AND MIDDLE OF THE
19TH CENTURIES.
FIRST, THE ENLIGHTENMENT
REACHED THE AMERICAS;
THEN, THE GOVERNMENT
OF CARLOS III
LAUNCHED THE BOURBON
REFORMS WHICH
ATTEMPTED TO REORGANIZE
THE AMERICAN TERRITORIES
AND MAXIMIZE THEIR
PROFITABILITY.
THESE POLICIES
ALSO HAD THE EFFECT
OF INVOLVING
THE COLONIES IN
EUROPEAN MILITARY
CONFLICTS OF THE TIME.
CURIOUSLY, THESE BOURBON
LAWS WERE THEMSELVES
THE BYPRODUCT OF VARIOUS
TRAVEL NARRATIVES:
THE WRITINGS OF
JUAN DE ULLOA
AND OF THE LA
CONDAMINE EXPEDITION;
AND THE STORIES OF
CAMPILLO AND COSSIO
WHO TRAVERSED THE CONTINENT
WHILE SENDING BACK
A SERIES OF REPORTS
TO THE FRENCH KINGS.
HISTORIANS HAVE CALLED
DRASTIC REFORMS IMPOSED BY
THE BOURBONS "THE SECOND
CONQUEST OF AMERICA".
THESE MEASURES LED TO
A REALIGNMENT BETWEEN
MOTHER COUNTRY AND COLONY,
AND FORGED THE CRUCIBLE
FOR MANY A LATIN
AMERICAN REBELLION.
MANY OTHER CHANGES
WRACKED THE CONTINENT:
THE 1767 EXPULSION
OF THE JESUITS
WHO RAN SOME OF
THE MOST IMPORTANT
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
IN THE NEW WORLD;
AND INDIGENOUS
REBELLIONS,
SUCH AS THAT OF TUPAC
AMARU IN PERU IN 1780,
WHICH WAS FORCEFULLY
SUPPRESSED.
THE LATIN-AMERICAN
LITERATURE OF THE ERA
- INCLUDING TRAVEL
NARRATIVES, MEMOIRS,
POETRY, AND NOVELS,
ECHOED A BURGEONING
SPIRIT OF INDEPENDENCE.
LIBERTY WAS A CENTRAL THEME
FOR WRITERS OF EVERY GENRE.
JOURNALISM SPREAD NEW
IDEAS; LETTERS, SPEECHES,
AND POLITICAL ESSAYS WERE
A SIGNIFICANT FORM OF
LITERARY OUTPUT ON THE
CONTINENT AT A MOMENT WHEN
WRITING AND REVOLUTION
WERE INTRINSICALLY UNITED.
HOWEVER, CULTURAL
INDEPENDENCE
CAN BE EVEN MORE
DIFFICULT TO ATTAIN
THAN POLITICAL
INDEPENDENCE.
EVEN AS LATIN-AMERICAN
LITERATURE BEGAN TO
COME INTO ITS OWN,
AUTHORS CONTINUED TO
RELY ON MODELS AND THEMES
IMPORTED FROM SPAIN.
THERE WAS SOMETHING
THE FOUNDING FATHERS
OF THE LATIN AMERICAN
NATIONS DID WELL;
DURING THE DAY THEY WERE
GENERALS, PRESIDENTS,
LEGISLATORS, BUT AT NIGHT
THEY BECAME NOVELISTS,
AND THEY WOULD IMITATE
AND PURPOSEFULLY CHANGE
THE MODELS OF POPULAR
EUROPEAN NOVELS.
FOR EXAMPLE,
A EUROPEAN NOVEL
COULD BE ABOUT LOVE,
ABOUT AN EROTIC RELATIONSHIP
THAT WAS FRUSTRATED
BECAUSE IT WENT AGAINST
THEIR SENSE OF DUTY.
LATIN AMERICANS UNDERSTOOD
VERY WELL THAT WITHOUT DESIRE
THERE WOULDN'T EXIST ANY
DUTY CAPABLE OF PRODUCING
A NEW SOCIETY.
THE DESIRE WAS PLACED
ON THE BATTLEFIELD.
AT THE SAME TIME, THIS NEW
LITERATURE ESTABLISHED
A DIALOGUE WITH OTHER
LITERARY TRADITIONS
AND AESTHETIC MOVEMENTS:
NEOCLASSICISM,
ROMANTICISM,
AND LATER,
REALISM AND SYMBOLISM.
IN THIS INTERWEAVING
ONE FINDS
THE "LITERATURE
OF INDEPENDENCE"
THAT IS PARTICULAR
TO THE NEW WORLD.
FAR FROM THE
TRADITIONS OF EUROPE,
LITERATURE THREADS TOGETHER
THE OLD AND THE NEW,
THE ALIEN AND
THE INDIGENOUS,
TO FORM ITS OWN
NEW CREATIONS.
AMONG THESE ARE LATIN
AMERICAN NOVELS
AND THE BEGINNINGS
OF "GAUCHO" POETRY.
THE ARGENTINEAN ESSAYIST,
SUSANA ZANETTI,
CLAIMS THAT "AMERICA
OWES ITS FIRST NOVEL
TO CENSORSHIP
OF THE PRESS".
THE GENESIS OF THE FIRST
LATIN AMERICAN NOVEL,
"SARMIENTO'S PARROT",
BEARS OUT HER ASSERTION.
LIZARDI BELONGS TO,
LET'S SAY, HIS THOUGHTS
ARE VERY ATTACHED TO
THOSE OF THE ILLUMINATI,
TO ENLIGHTENMENT.
AND HE ENVISIONS A
SOCIETY FOUNDED UPON
A STRONG REFORMATION OF
ETHICAL AND MORAL VALUES
AND BEHAVIOR,
AND DUE TO THAT,
HE WOULD HAVE BIG
PROBLEMS WITH CENSORSHIP.
AT THE BEGINNING OF
THE 19TH CENTURY,
THE MEXICAN REVOLUTIONARIES
DON MIGUEL HIDALGO
AND JOSE MARIA MORELOS
WERE ISSUING DEFIANT
PROCLAMATIONS AGAINST
SPANISH DOMINANCE.
SPAIN REACTED SWIFTLY AND
ANGRILY, QUELLING DISSENT
AND EXERCISING CENSORSHIP
OVER THE MEDIA.
THE MEXICAN AUTHOR,
JOSE JOAQUIM
FERNANDEZ DE LIZARDI,
A JOURNALIST WHO WROTE
UNDER THE PEN NAME
"THE MEXICAN THINKER",
ATTEMPTED TO DODGE
GOVERNMENT CENSORS
BY PUBLISHING HIS
NOVEL IN INSTALLMENTS.
HE WAS NOT ENTIRELY
SUCCESSFUL, HOWEVER.
THOUGH HE STARTED
PUBLISHING IN 1816,
THE LAST FOUR VOLUMES WERE
NOT PUBLISHED UNTIL 1831.
THE NOVEL IS WRITTEN IN
THE PICARESQUE TRADITION,
A SATIRICAL WORK THAT
FOLLOWS THE CAREER
OF A ROGUISH HERO WHO
LIVES BY HIS WITS.
DESPITE ITS
COMIC DIMENSIONS,
THE NOVEL HAS A CLEAR
PEDAGOGICAL INTENT:
TO INSTRUCT AND EDUCATE THE
FLEDGLING MIDDLE CLASSES.
THIS CHARACTER IS
RATHER TYPICAL
IN THE SPANISH
PICARESQUE GENRE,
AND IN THAT SENSE IT IS THE
FIRST LATIN AMERICAN NOVEL
PLACED HALFWAY
BETWEEN
INDEPENDENCE FROM
THE EUROPEAN MODELS
AND THE GENERATION
WITH NEW PERSPECTIVES.
THE NOVEL MARRIES LOW
COMEDY WITH A HIGH
MORAL TONE - A SYNTHESIS
THAT WAS TO BECOME
A RECURRENT MOTIF
OF MEXICAN NOVELS.
IT ALSO VIVIDLY DEPICTS
THE SOCIETY OF THE TIME -
SATIRIZING ITS SHORTCOMINGS
WHILE AFFECTIONATELY
RECORDING THE VOICES,
PLACES, AND CHARACTERS
THAT POPULATE
SARMIENTO'S WORLD.
I WAS BORN IN THE CITY
OF MEXICO, THE CAPITAL
OF NORTH AMERICA,
IN NEW SPAIN.
NEVER COULD MY MOUTH SING
SUFFICIENT PRAISE IN HONOR
OF MY DEAR COUNTRY;
BUT SINCE IT IS MINE,
SUCH PRAISE WOULD
BE EVER SUSPECT.
THOSE WHO LIVE THERE, AND
THE FOREIGNERS WHO HAVE
SEEN IT, CAN GIVE MORE
BELIEVABLE PANEGYRICS,
FOR THEY ARE NOT
CONSTRAINED BY PARTIALITY,
WHOSE MAGNIFYING LENS
CAN AT TIMES HIDE DEFECTS
WHILE ENLARGING THE
ADVANTAGES OF A COUNTRY,
EVEN TO THOSE
BORN THERE.
I LEAVE, THEREFORE, THE
DESCRIPTION OF MEXICO
TO IMPARTIAL OBSERVERS.
LIZARDI WROTE
"SARMIENTO'S PARROT"
AT ABOUT THE SAME TIME
THAT THE FAMOUS PRIEST,
FRAY SERVANDO
TERESA DE MIER,
WAS PUTTING DOWN HIS
ADVENTURES IN WRITING.
A MEXICAN DOMINICAN PRIEST
WHO STRUGGLED FOR HIS
COUNTRY'S INDEPENDENCE,
FRAY SERVANDO WAS
BOLD ENOUGH TO STAND UP
TO THE CHURCH ITSELF,
AND ENDED UP
EXILED IN SPAIN
FOR HIS PRO-INDEPENDENCE
ACTIVITIES.
IN THE CASE OF
FRAY SERVANDO,
HIS STRUGGLE FOR THE
INDEPENDENCE OF MEXICO
ENCOMPASSED ALL THE
LEVELS OF CONTACT,
INCLUDING THE PRESS,
IDEOLOGICAL SPEECHES,
BOOKS OF HISTORY
AND ARMED COMBAT
- HE PARTICIPATES
IN ALL OF THESE.
INSPIRED BY THE WRITINGS
OF FRAY BARTOLOME
DE LAS CASAS, HE USED HIS
MEMOIRS TO EXAMINE THE
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
SPAIN AND ITS COLONIES,
AND IN THE PROCESS HE ARGUED
FOR LOCAL INDEPENDENCE.
FRAY SERVANDO HAD AN
AMAZING MEMORY -
AKIN TO BERNAL DIAZ'S
DETAILED RECOLLECTIONS
IN HIS "TRUE HISTORY OF
THE CONQUEST OF NEW SPAIN".
HE USED THIS TROVE TO
CHRONICLE THE POLITICAL
AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS
OF HIS HOMELAND.
AT THE SAME TIME, HE
REACHED OUT TO EDUCATED
EUROPEANS IN
FRANCE AND SPAIN,
HOPING FOR
THEIR SUPPORT.
FOR HIS EFFORTS, HE WAS
IMPRISONED AND TRIED.
IN HIS "MEMOIRS" HE
HOLDS NO PUNCHES
IN HIS CRITICISM OF
THE FUNCTIONARIES
WHO PERSECUTE HIM
AND HIS COUNTRYMEN.
THE AGENTS OF THE
INDIES, TO BE GOOD,
MUST BE ABSOLUTE KNAVES,
WITHOUT SOUL OR CONSCIENCE.
THEY HAD THE
KEYS TO THE COURT
AND THE COUNCIL OF
THE INDIES BOUGHT OFF.
WITH HUMOR AND DRAMA, THE
DOMINICAN ALSO RECOUNTS
HIS STOPOVER IN A
JAIL CLOSE TO MADRID.
AFTER THREE DAYS, EVEN
THOUGH THE BISHOP'S
SENTENCE RULED NOTHING
BUT JUST RECLUSION IN THE
CONVENT, I WAS PUT IN A
CELL, FROM WHERE I WAS
TAKEN OUT ONLY FOR CHORUS,
REFECTORY, AND THEY COULD
ALSO TAKE ME OUT
TO ROUSE THE RATS.
SO MANY WERE THEY AND SO
BIG, THAT THEY ATE MY HAT,
AND I HAD TO SLEEP ARMED
WITH A WOODEN STICK
SO THEY WOULD
NOT EAT ME.
LIKE LIZARDI, FRAY
SERVANDO WROTE IN THE
PICARESQUE TRADITION,
TAKING AS HIS MODEL
THE FANTASTICAL
TRAVEL NARRATIVE.
HE USED HYPERBOLE, SATIRE,
AND BURLESQUE TO ADDRESS
SERIOUS TOPICS - HUNGER,
DESPAIR, AND PERSECUTION.
THROUGH HIS NARRATIVE
LENS, THE THEMES OF
PERSECUTION AND BETRAYAL
ARE RE-SIGNIFIED
AS ARGUMENTS FOR
INDEPENDENCE.
BIZARRE INCIDENTS THAT
CROP UP IN HIS "MEMOIRS"
POINT THE WAY TO AN
ALTERNATIVE UNDERSTANDING
OF THE TALE AND OF
EXPERIENCE ITSELF.
THIS INTENTIONALLY SKEWED
WORLDVIEW WILL RECUR
LATER IN LATIN
AMERICAN LITERATURE,
SUCH AS WHEN THE CUBAN
WRITER, REINALDO ARENAS,
REPRISED THE FIGURE
OF FRAY SERVANDO
IN HIS NOVEL "THE
HALLUCINATING WORLD".
AN AESTHETIC STORM
SWEPT THROUGH EUROPE
IN THE 18TH CENTURY, A
POWERFUL AND COMPELLING
MOVEMENT THAT CAME TO BE
KNOWN AS "ROMANTICISM".
THE ROMANTICS RENOUNCED
THE ENLIGHTENMENTS'
RATIONALIZATION OF
NATURE, AND STAGED A
PHILOSOPHICAL REVOLT
AGAINST ARISTOCRATIC
SOCIAL AND POLITICAL
NORMS OF THE DAY.
NATURALLY, SOUTH AMERICAN
REVOLUTIONARIES EMBRACED
ROMANTICISM, WHICH ARRIVED
ON THEIR CONTINENT
BY WAY OF WRITERS SUCH
AS ESTEBAN ECHEVERRIA.
ECHEVERRIA SPENT
FIVE YEARS IN PARIS
JUST AS ROMANTICISM
WAS AT ITS ZENITH,
RETURNING TO BUENOS
AIRES IN 1830.
IN 1832, HE INTRODUCED THE
MOVEMENT TO THE NEW WORLD,
STARTING WITH THE
PUBLICATION OF HIS POEM
"ELVIRA" OR "THE
BRIDE OF THE PLATA".
HIS LATER PUBLICATIONS -
A BOOK OF POEMS ENTITLED
"CONSOLATIONS", THE
POEM "THE CAPTIVE",
AND HIS STORY "THE
SLAUGHTERHOUSE",
ALSO EXHIBIT MANY
HALLMARKS OF ROMANTICISM:
THE EXALTATION OF THE EGO;
THE REJECTION OF TRADITION
AND CLASSICAL RULES; A
RETURN TO WHAT IS SIMPLE;
EXALTATION OF NATURE AS
BOTH MODEL AND MOTIVE;
AND THE QUEST FOR A
NATIONAL LITERATURE.
THESE BECAME BASIC
TENETS OF LATIN AMERICAN
ROMANTICISM, HELPING
DEFINE THE AESTHETICS
AND PHILOSOPHY OF
THE CONTINENT'S
NEWLY EMERGING
NATIONAL CULTURES.
THE QUEST WAS TO
FIND THEMES, FORMS,
AND A VERNACULAR
THAT DEPOSED
SPANISH
IMPERIAL INFLUENCE.
TO THIS END, THE
ARGENTINE CRITIC,
JUAN MARIA GUTIERREZ,
PUBLISHED THE FIRST
ANTHOLOGY OF LATIN
AMERICAN POETRY,
"AMERICA POETICA",
IN 1846.
GUTIERREZ WAS A NOTED
INTELLECTUAL AND FOUNDER,
ALONG WITH ANDRES BELLO,
OF THE MAGAZINE CALLED
THE AMERICAN LIBRARY.
HE CALLED FOR A CLEAN BREAK
WITH THE COLONIAL PAST.
SPANISH SCIENCE AND
LITERATURE ARE NULL AND VOID,
WE SHOULD DIVORCE OURSELVES
ENTIRELY FROM THEM,
EMANCIPATE OURSELVES
IN THIS RESPECT
FROM THE PENINSULAR
TRADITIONS,
AS WE WERE ABLE TO
DO IN POLITICS
WHEN WE DECLARED
OURSELVES FREE.
YET WE REMAIN BOUND
BY THE STRONG
AND NARROW BOND
OF LANGUAGE:
BUT THIS SHOULD
WEAKEN IN TIME,
AS WE ENTER INTO THE
INTELLECTUAL MOVEMENT
OF THE ADVANCED
PEOPLES OF EUROPE.
LATIN-AMERICAN
INDEPENDENCE MOVEMENTS
GAVE BIRTH TO A NEW
TYPE OF POPULAR VERSE:
GAUCHO POETRY.
GAUCHOS WERE SOUTH
AMERICAN CATTLE HERDERS,
ROUGHLY EQUIVALENT TO THE
NORTH AMERICAN COWBOY,
AND ALSO A SYMBOL OF
ROUGH-HEWN INDIVIDUALISM.
AS SUCH, GAUCHO LITERATURE
SPRANG FROM THE EARTH
AND SPOKE FROM THE HEART OF
THE LATIN AMERICAN PEOPLE.
THE URUGUAYAN POET,
BARTOLOME HIDALGO,
COMPOSED HIS WORKS
"PATRIOTIC SKIES"
AND "PATRIOTIC DIALOGS"
IN THE PERIOD BETWEEN
1812 AND 1822.
HIDALGO WROTE IN
SUPPORT OF THE PUSH FOR
INDEPENDENCE SPEARHEADED
BY JOSE GERVASIO ARTIGAS.
HE WORKED IN A FORM
OF POPULAR POETRY
CALLED THE OCTAVE,
WHICH ECHOED
THE RHYTHM AND CADENCE
OF GAUCHO MINSTRELS.
IN A MEMORABLE SERIES OF
POEMS, HIDALGO BOLDLY
EVANGELIZED HIS READERS
TO JOIN THE REVOLUTION,
AS IN HIS
FAMOUS POEM
"LITTLE SKY OF
INDEPENDENCE".
IF OF EVERYTHING IN
CREATION IT IS HEAVEN
THAT IS THE BEST,
"HEAVEN" MUST BE
THE DANCE OF THE
PEOPLES OF THE UNION.
HEAVEN, LITTLE HEAVEN
AND MORE HEAVEN,
LITTLE HEAVEN ALWAYS
SING THE HAPPINESS
COMES FROM HEAVEN, FROM
HEAVEN COMES FREEDOM.
TODAY A NATION IS
INTRODUCING ITSELF
TO THE WORLD, WELL
THE UNITED PROVINCES
PROCLAIM THEIR
INDEPENDENCE.
LITTLE SKY, MERRY SKY,
SKY OF LIBERTY,
SWEARING INDEPENDENCE
WE ARE SLAVES NO MORE.
HIDALGO'S EIGHT-SYLLABLE
VERSES, WRITTEN IN THE
TRADITION OF SPANISH
POPULAR POETRY,
ADDRESS THE SENSIBILITIES
OF LESS-EDUCATED FOLK
WHO, BEING UNABLE TO
READ, IMMERSE THEMSELVES
IN LITERATURE BY
MEMORIZING WORKS
THAT ARE
RECITED TO THEM.
THIS IS A WHOLLY
DISTINCT WAY
OF READING
AND LISTENING,
COMPLETELY ALIEN FROM
THAT OF THE UPPER CLASSES.
MOREOVER, THIS POETRY
EMPLOYED WHAT WAS THEN
A NOVEL STRATEGY - THE
PERSON NARRATING THE PIECE
IN FIRST PERSON IS
THE GAUCHO HIMSELF.
FOR THE FIRST TIME IN
SOUTH AMERICAN LITERATURE,
THE VOICE OF THE PEOPLE IS
HEARD, AS ECHOED THROUGH
THE PRISM OF THE
EDUCATED PERSON
WHO ADAPTS THAT
VOICE TO THE PAGE.
GAUCHO POETRY IS A
GENRE ORIGINAL TO
LATIN AMERICAN
LITERATURE.
IT HAS DIFFERENT STAGES
THAT TAKE PLACE BETWEEN
THE PERIOD THAT STARTS
DURING THE MAY REVOLUTION
THE REVOLUTIONARY PERIOD,
AND THE PERIOD WHEN
THE NATIONAL STATE IS
BEING CONSOLIDATED.
THIS HAPPENED IN
ARGENTINA AROUND 1880.
SO DURING THAT PERIOD YOU
CAN FIND DIFFERENT AUTHORS
SOME QUITE IMPORTANT,
SOME NOT THAT WELL KNOWN
BUT WHO WERE ALSO
PART OF THIS GENRE.
ANOTHER POET OF GREAT
IMPORT FROM THIS PERIOD
IS THE PERUVIAN WRITER
MARIANO MELGAR.
MELGAR WAS A MESTIZO
- A PERSON OF MIXED
EUROPEAN AND AMERICAN
INDIAN ANCESTRY.
HE TYPICALLY ADHERED TO
TRADITIONAL NEOCLASSICAL
FORMS IN HIS ODES, SONNETS
AND FABLES; HOWEVER,
SOME OF HIS WORKS,
SUCH AS "YARAVIES",
LOOSELY TRANSLATED AS
"MELANCHOLY INDIAN SONGS"
INCORPORATE A
POPULIST VOICE,
ENGAGING PLOT CONVENTIONS,
AND INDIGENOUS FORMS.
MELGAR BROUGHT TOGETHER
THE STANDARD ELEMENTS
OF "HIGH" POETRY WITH
THE MOTIFS AND TIMBRE
OF INDIGENOUS
TRADITIONS.
NATURALLY, MUCH OF HIS
WORK RESONATED WITH
THE CRY FOR INDEPENDENCE,
AS IS DEMONSTRATED
IN HIS CELEBRATED WORK,
"ODE TO LIBERTY".
FINALLY FREE AND
SAFE I CAN SING.
THE HARD BRIDLE HAS
BROKEN, I WILL DISCOVER
MY HAVEN, AND WITH PURE
LANGUAGE I WILL SHOW
THE TRUTH THAT
TAKES REFUGE IN IT,
MY WELL UNDERSTOOD
FREEDOM.
HEAR: CEASE YOUR WEEPING;
RAISE YOUR DOWNCAST FACES,
INDIANS WHO WITH FEAR,
OPPRESSED SLAVES,
WITHOUT CONSOLATION
FROM HEAVEN OR EARTH,
YOU HAVE BEEN
CAPTIVES IN OUR SOIL.
THE POPULIST STYLE
OF POETRY GAVE VOICE
TO THE YEARNINGS
OF THE PEOPLE
AND ECHOED CRIES
FOR INDEPENDENCE.
YET MANY POETS WORKING IN
THE NEOCLASSICAL STYLE OF
THE TIME WERE ALSO SINGING
THE PRAISES OF LIBERTY,
ALBEIT IN REFINED METER
AND HIGH-TONED LANGUAGE.
WRITERS SUCH AS
JUAN CRUZ VARELA
AND JOSE JOAQUIN
DE OLMEDO
WERE UNDOUBTEDLY
UNDER THE INFLUENCE
OF BOTH SPANISH AND
CLASSICAL POETS,
BUT THEY CREATED WORKS
THAT WERE PATRIOTIC,
ANTI-SPAIN,
AND PRO-INDIAN.
NOT COINCIDENTALLY,
THIS IS ALSO THE PERIOD
DURING WHICH SEVERAL LATIN
AMERICAN NATIONAL ANTHEMS
WERE COMPOSED.
THESE WORKS
WERE TYPICALLY
NEOCLASSIC POEMS SET
TO MUSIC, AS IS THE CASE
WITH THE ARGENTINEAN
NATIONAL ANTHEM,
WRITTEN BY VICENTE
LOPEZ Y PLANES.
THE MEN WHO LED THE
CHARGE FOR LATIN AMERICAN
INDEPENDENCE WERE ALSO
FORCES TO BE RECKONED WITH
IN THE WORLD
OF LITERATURE.
THESE DYNAMIC
PERSONALITIES,
INSTRUMENTAL IN DRIVING
A WEDGE BETWEEN THE
NEW WORLD AND THE OLD,
ALSO LEFT A LEGACY OF
LETTERS, SPEECHES,
AND MANIFESTOS -
WORK THAT TODAY
CONSTITUTES A CENTRAL
PART OF THE LATIN
AMERICAN ARCHIVE.
AMONG THESE LEADERS
WAS THE ARISTOCRATIC
REVOLUTIONARY
SIMON BOLIVAR.
KNOWN AND BELOVED
AS "THE LIBERATOR",
BOLIVAR WIELDED THE WORD
AS WELL AS THE SWORD
IN HIS FIGHT FOR
INDEPENDENCE.
HE LEFT BEHIND WORKS SUCH
AS "LETTER FROM JAMAICA",
WRITTEN IN
EXILE IN 1815,
IN WHICH HE SUPPORTED
LATIN AMERICAN UNITY;
AND THE FAMOUS
"ANGOSTURA SPEECH"
IN WHICH HE RENOUNCED
THE SPECIAL POWERS
THAT HAD BEEN
GRANTED HIM
AND OUTLINED THE REPUBLIC
THAT WAS TO FOLLOW.
"THE LETTER FROM JAMAICA"
WAS WRITTEN WHEN BOLIVAR
HAD RETREATED TO THAT
ISLAND AFTER A SERIES
OF MILITARY AND
POLITICAL SETBACKS.
IT IS ACTUALLY A RESPONSE
TO A LETTER FROM AN
ENGLISHMAN, HENRY CULLEN,
THROUGH WHOM BOLIVAR
SOUGHT TO REACH THE
ANGLO-SAXON WORLD.
HIS GOAL WAS TO
EXPLAIN THE MOTIVES
FOR THE LATIN AMERICAN
QUEST FOR INDEPENDENCE,
AND TO SECURE THE
COLLABORATION OF ENGLAND.
IN HIS CORRESPONDENCE WITH
CULLEN, BOLIVAR WOVE A
TALE OF SPANISH INIQUITY
AND CUNNING WHOSE GENESIS
REACHED BACK TO THE FIRST
MOMENTS OF THE CONQUEST.
HE LEVELS SCORCHING
CRITICISM AT THE MISDEEDS
OF THE SPANIARDS, CALLING
THEM, "ATROCITIES THAT
SEEM GREATER THAN HUMAN
PERVERSITY COULD ALLOW;
AND THEY WOULD NEVER BE
BELIEVED BY MODERN CRITICS
IF COUNTLESS DOCUMENTS
DID NOT TESTIFY
TO THESE
ILL-FATED TRUTHS".
HE CONCLUDED THIS
REMARKABLE WORK
WITH A VISION DEAR TO HIS
HEART - THAT OF AMERICA
AS A "GREAT
IMPOSSIBLE REPUBLIC".
IT IS A GRANDIOSE IDEA TO
THINK OF CONSOLIDATING
THE NEW WORLD INTO
A SINGLE NATION,
UNIFIED BY PACTS
INTO A SINGLE BOND.
IT IS REASONED THAT, AS
THESE PARTS HAVE A COMMON
ORIGIN, LANGUAGE,
CUSTOMS, AND RELIGION,
THEY OUGHT TO HAVE A SINGLE
GOVERNMENT TO PERMIT THE
NEWLY FORMED STATES TO
UNITE IN A CONFEDERATION.
BUT THIS IS
NOT POSSIBLE.
ACTUALLY, AMERICA IS
SEPARATED BY CLIMATIC
DIFFERENCES, GEOGRAPHIC
DIVERSITY, CONFLICTING
INTERESTS, AND DISSIMILAR
CHARACTERISTICS.
THE DREAM OF FORMING A
UNITED LATIN AMERICA -
"OUR AMERICA", AS THE
WRITER JOSE MARTI
WOULD CALL IT 70
YEARS LATER -
WOULD BECOME AN
OBSESSIVE PREOCCUPATION
FOR LATIN AMERICANS
IN THE COMING YEARS.
THIS CONVERSATION BEGAN
WITH THE WRITINGS OF
REVOLUTIONARIES LIKE SIMON
BOLIVAR, THE ARGENTINEAN
GENERAL JOSE DE SAN
MARTIN, AND THE URUGUAYAN
NATIONAL HERO
JOSE ARTIGAS.
INDEPENDENCE FROM SPAIN
WAS NOT TO BE ACHIEVED
SOLELY BY FORCE OF
ARMS, NOR COULD IT
BE BROUGHT ABOUT BY
MERE PROCLAMATIONS.
DECLARING INDEPENDENCE FOR
THE NEW WORLD COLONIES
DID NOT MEAN THAT
NEW SOVEREIGN NATIONS
WOULD SIMPLY SPRING
UP IN THEIR PLACE.
HOWEVER, THE LITERATURE
OF REVOLUTION
DID FOSTER A GOOD
DEAL OF REFLECTION
ON THE IDEA OF LATIN
AMERICA ITSELF;
ON INDIVIDUAL
AND SHARED IDENTITY,
ON FUTURE NATIONS, ON
CULTURAL INDEPENDENCE,
AND ON SUBMISSION
TO A LANGUAGE
THAT REPRESENTED
COLONIAL OPPRESSION.
YET THAT LANGUAGE WAS
ALREADY AN ESSENTIAL
COMPONENT OF LATIN
AMERICAN IDENTITY.
ONE FIGURE LIES AT THE
CENTER OF THESE DEBATES -
THE VENEZUELAN HUMANIST,
POET, LAWMAKER,
PHILOSOPHER, EDUCATOR, AND
PHILOLOGIST ANDRES BELLO.
HE HAS BEEN CALLED THE
"ARCHETYPE OF THE 19TH
CENTURY LATIN AMERICAN
EDUCATOR AND CIVIC POET"
AND HIS BIOGRAPHY
READS LIKE
A HISTORY OF
THE CONTINENT.
BELLO WAS BORN IN CARACAS,
BUT LIVED MUCH OF HIS LIFE
ON THE MOVE,
TRAVELING OR IN EXILE.
HE WAS A FRIEND OF THE
FAMED GERMAN NATURALIST
AND EXPLORER,
ALEXANDER VON HUMBOLDT,
AND A COMPANION ON
SOME OF HIS JOURNEYS.
HE WAS A FIXTURE IN
EUROPEAN INTELLECTUAL
CIRCLES, AND HE WAS EVEN
SIMON BOLIVAR'S TEACHER
FOR A PERIOD OF TIME.
DESPITE HIS IMPRESSIVE
RESUME, BELLO WAS AN
OBJECT OF CONTROVERSY, AND
HIS HIGH PROFILE MADE HIM
A TARGET FOR PERSONAL
ATTACKS AND ACCUSATIONS.
AT THE AGE OF 48,
BELLO ARRIVED IN CHILE,
HOUNDED BY DEBATES
AND RIVALRIES
SUCH AS DOMINGO
FAUSTINO SARMIENTO,
THE ARGENTINE WRITER
AND POLITICIAN,
AND JOSE LASTARRIA.
LASTARRIA ARGUED THAT
THE WRITER MUST TEASE OUT
THE MEANING OF
HISTORICAL FACTS
TO DRAW LESSONS
FOR THE PRESENT.
BELLO, BY CONTRAST, FELT
THAT BECAUSE OUR KNOWLEDGE
OF HISTORY ó PARTICULARLY
SOUTH AMERICAN HISTORY -
WAS INCOMPLETE,
THE BEST COURSE WAS TO
STICK TO KNOWN FACTS.
DISPUTES SUCH AS THESE,
THOUGH SEEMINGLY ARCANE
TO OUR EARS, GENERATED
HUGE FIRESTORMS OF DEBATE
IN BELLO'S TIME.
BELLO BECAME A PROMINENT
FIGURE IN CHILE,
AN OFFICIAL IN THE MINISTRY
OF EXTERNAL RELATIONS,
THE FIRST RECTOR OF THE
UNIVERSITY OF CHILE,
AND A MEMBER OF THE
MOST IMPORTANT LEGAL
AND EDUCATIONAL
COMMISSIONS.
WELL-VERSED IN GREEK AND
LATIN LITERATURE AND THE
SPANISH CLASSICS, HE WAS
A HIGHLY ERUDITE MAN WHO
LEVERAGED THE POWER OF
EDUCATION AND LANGUAGE
TO HELP CHART THE
DESTINIES OF A CONTINENT.
HE LEFT BEHIND A HUGE
LITERARY LEGACY,
INCLUDING HIS "GRAMMAR OF
THE CASTILIAN LANGUAGE,
DEDICATED FOR THE
USE BY AMERICANS".
ONE OF HIS MOST FAMOUS
POEMS WAS "SILVA TO THE
AGRICULTURE OF THE TORRID
ZONE" WRITTEN IN 1826.
IT WAS INTENDED TO BE PART
OF AN EPIC WORK ENTITLED
"AMERICA", WHICH
HE NEVER FINISHED.
A CLASSICAL
REVOLUTIONARY,
BELLO IS A STUDY
IN CONTRASTS,
DEDICATED TO WIELDING
THE SPANISH LANGUAGE
IN HIS CALL FOR THE END
OF SPANISH DOMINATION.
SAVE, FRUITFUL LAND,
WHO CIRCUMSCRIBED THE
PASSIONATE SUN TO THE
VAGUE COURSE, AND AS A
BEING DARE YOURSELF ONTO
EVERY DISTINCT CLIMATE,
CARESSED BY ITS
LIGHT, BEGET!
YOU KNIT FOR
THE SUMMER
ITS GARLAND OF
POMEGRANATE SPIKES;
YOU GIVE THE GRAPES
TO THE BURNING BARREL,
NOT OF PURPLISH FRUIT,
OR RED, OR YELLOW;
FOR YOUR BEAUTIFUL
FORESTS, NO LACK OF SHADE,
AND DRINK FROM THEM THE
THOUSAND SMELLS OF THE WIND.
DURING THE QUEST FOR
INDEPENDENCE AND IN ITS
AFTERMATH, THE PROSE
ESSAY BECAME A FIXTURE
IN LATIN AMERICAN
LITERATURE.
AS THE 19TH CENTURY
PROGRESSED AND THE PACE
OF CHANGE ACCELERATED, THE
ESSAY BECAME A FLASH POINT
OF DIALOGUE, A MEANS OF
ACHIEVING NOTHING LESS
THAN NATIONAL
COHESIVENESS.
THE MOST OUTSTANDING NEW
WORLD ESSAYISTS WERE THE
PUERTO RICAN JOSE MARIA
DE HOSTOS, THE BOLIVIAN
GABRIEL RENE-MORENO, THE
ECUADORIAN JOSE MONTALVO,
AND THE ARGENTINEAN
DOMINGO FAUSTINO SARMIENTO.
THE GENRE OF THE ESSAY
HAD, IN MY OPINION,
HIGH AND LOW POINTS.
THERE ARE GREAT
ESSAY WRITERS,
SUCH AS JOSE
MARIA LUIS MORA,
WHO WAS A MAN WITH
AN ENORMOUS ABILITY
TO ANALYZE A SITUATION
AND HANDLE IT MODERATELY,
RENDERING A DIAGNOSIS
OF WHAT WAS HAPPENING
WITH GOOD JUDGMENT.
THERE WERE OTHERS WHO
WEREN'T AS MODERATE,
AND IN THESE CASES THE
ESSAY BECOMES A PAMPHLET.
BORN IN THE FINAL STAGES OF
THE INDEPENDENCE MOVEMENTS,
THESE WRITERS REPRESENTED
A NEW GENERATION;
ONE THAT AGGRESSIVELY
QUESTIONED
OLD-GUARD INTELLECTUALS
ON THE ROLE OF LANGUAGE,
THE NATURE OF CULTURE,
AND NATIONAL ORGANIZATION.
OF THESE MEN, SARMIENTO IS
PERHAPS THE BEST KNOWN.
HE SERVED AS PRESIDENT OF
ARGENTINA FOR SIX YEARS
BUT IS REMEMBERED AS
MUCH FOR HIS PERSISTENT
DIATRIBES, BRILLIANT
POLEMICS, AND INCISIVE
ATTACKS AS HE IS FOR HIS
POLITICAL ACHIEVEMENTS.
HIS MOST FAMOUS
WORK IS "FACUNDO",
AN ESSAY THAT EXAMINES
THE COMPLEX DYNAMIC
OF CIVILIZATION
AND BRUTALITY.
THE FACT IS, HOWEVER, THAT
NONE OF SARMIENTO'S WORKS
CAN BE COMPLETELY CONTAINED
WITHIN ONE LITERARY GENRE.
HE WOVE TOGETHER
BIOGRAPHY, MEMOIR,
DIATRIBE, AND PEDAGOGICAL
DISCOURSE, ALWAYS WITH THE
STAMP OF THE EGO THROUGH
WHICH ALL IS FILTERED.
HE WAS ALSO AN OPPONENT OF
THE ARGENTINEAN DICTATOR,
JUAN MANUEL DE ROSAS, AND
LATER EMIGRATED TO CHILE
WHERE HE WROTE "FACUNDO",
WHOSE OPENING LINES
REVERBERATE DOWN
TO THIS DAY.
TERRIBLE SHADOW OF
FACUNDO, I WILL SUMMON YOU
SO THAT, BRUSHING OFF THE
BLOODY DUST THAT COVERS
YOUR ASHES, YOU ARISE
TO EXPLAIN TO US
THE SECRET LIFE AND THE
INTERNAL CONVULSIONS
THAT ARE RENDING THE CORE
OF THIS NOBLE PEOPLE!
SARMIENTO ANALYZED THE
GEOGRAPHY, HISTORY,
AND SOCIAL CLIMATE
OF HIS COUNTRY -
AT TIMES WITH
AN EXALTED TONE,
ALWAYS EMPHATIC, GROUNDED
IN PHILOSOPHICAL LIBERALISM,
AND THE BELIEF THAT EUROPE
IS A DEBTOR CIVILIZATION.
IN HIS TEXTS, SARMIENTO
ESSENTIALLY WROTE HIS WAY
TO AN UNDERSTANDING OF
WHAT NATIONHOOD MEANS,
AN UNDERSTANDING THAT HE
THEN RIGOROUSLY APPLIED
IN HIS ONGOING
POLITICAL STRUGGLE.
HIS WORLDVIEW COUNTERPOSED
RURAL "BARBARITY" WITH
URBAN "CIVILIZATION" AND
IMPLICITLY CRITICIZED
THE DICTATOR, ROSAS, BY
ASSERTING THAT THE WAY
TO PROGRESS WAS THROUGH
EDUCATION AND THE
ELIMINATION OF BARBARIAN
AUTHORITARIANISM.
ABOUT SARMIENTO, I'D SAY
HIS NAME IS MOST OFTEN LINKED
TO HIS ROLE AS AN EDUCATOR.
IN CHILE HE HAD VERY
IMPORTANT ACCOMPLISHMENTS.
ON ONE HAND HE CREATED
THE PUBLIC LIBRARIES
THAT WAS A MAJOR CONCERN FOR
HIM AND HE FOUGHT INTENSELY
TO IMPOSE NEW IDEAS,
A DIFFERENT LANGUAGE,
ONE THAT WOULD NOT
BE ATTACHED TO
THE RULES OF THE
EUROPEAN SPANISH.
SARMIENTO WORKED WITHIN
THE CONTEXT OF THE
WESTERN CANON, EMPLOYING
THE EUROPEAN OUTLOOK
TO EXAMINE THE LATIN
AMERICAN EXPERIENCE.
AT THE SAME TIME, HE WAS
ABLE TO PARSE EXPERIENCE
IN A WAY THAT WAS TOTALLY
DIVORCED FROM THE OLD
WORLD'S DISCIPLINED AND
HIERARCHICAL EPISTEMOLOGY.
HIS WORLDVIEW PRESENTS
ITSELF TO THE SENSES
IN A DISTINCTLY
NEW WORLD MANNER.
SARMIENTO CREATED A
LANGUAGE THAT IS LITERARY,
NATIONAL, AND PERSONAL;
ONE THAT IS ESSENTIAL
FOR THE GENESIS OF A
NEW LATIN AMERICA.
AND HE DEFINED AFRESH THE
ROLE OF THE AMERICAN WRITER.
THERE IS AN EXEMPLARY
JUSTICE TO DO,
AND A GLORY TO OBTAIN
AS AN ARGENTINE WRITER:
TO UPBRAID THE
WORLD AND HUMILIATE
THE HAUGHTINESS OF THE
BIG NAMES IN THE WORLD,
WHETHER THEY
CALL THEMSELVES
SCHOLARS OR GOVERNORS.
NO DISCUSSION OF THE
INTERSECTION BETWEEN
LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS
AND LITERATURE
WOULD BE COMPLETE
WITHOUT CONSIDERING
THE WORKS OF THE CUBAN
WRITER JOSE MARTI.
MARTI WAS ONE OF THE
FOREMOST INTELLECTUALS
AND POETS OF
THE NEW WORLD,
A PIONEERING VOICE
OF MODERNISM,
A NOTED POLITICIAN,
A PAINTER, AND A
GIFTED JOURNALIST.
OF HIS EXTENSIVE
OEUVRE, ONE WORK
IN PARTICULAR SEEKS
TO ARTICULATE THE
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
POLITICS AND WRITING -
THE ESSAY ENTITLED
"OUR AMERICA".
IN IT, MARTI CALLS FOR
GOVERNANCE THAT IS UNIQUE
AND APPROPRIATE
TO THE AMERICAS,
ONE THAT REJECTS THE
VESTIGES OF COLONIALISM,
ENCOMPASSES THE DIVERSITY
OF THE AMERICAS,
AND ACKNOWLEDGES THEIR
PRE-COLUMBIAN PAST.
HE ALSO WARNED OF
THE THREAT POSED BY
"THE GIANT OF THE NORTH"
- THE UNITED STATES.
THE ESSAY'S THEMES ARE
BOUND UP WITH MARTI'S
MODERNIST WORLDVIEW AND
HIS DESIRE FOR A STRONG,
COHESIVE, AND COHERENT
LATIN AMERICA.
THE TEXT INTENDS TO
BE VERY INFLUENTIAL.
WHEN YOU READ IT, YOU GET
THE FOLLOWING IMPRESSION:
"YOU'RE WITH ME OR
YOU'RE AGAINST ME."
THERE IS NO
MIDDLE POINT.
HE CREATES AN ACCOUNT OF
LATIN AMERICAN HISTORY,
THE COLONIAL PERIOD,
THE REVOLUTIONS...
WHAT HE SAYS IS AS IMPORTANT
AS HOW HE SAYS IT,
BECAUSE IT IS
STRONGLY POETIC.
AT THE TIME THAT
MARTI WAS WRITING,
CUBA WAS STILL
A SPANISH COLONY.
CUBA FOUND ITSELF IN A
PRECARIOUS SITUATION,
AT RISK OF BEING PURCHASED
BY THE UNITED STATES
- THE FATE OF ALASKA
AND LOUISIANA -
OR OF SIMPLY BEING ANNEXED,
AS HAD HAPPENED
WITH A LARGE PART OF
MEXICO'S TERRITORY.
MARTI HAD LIVED MUCH
OF HIS LIFE IN THE U.S.
AND HE FELT ACUTELY
CUBA'S WANING OPPORTUNITY
FOR INDEPENDENCE,
AND THE ATTENDANT
LOSS OF IDENTITY -
BOTH NATIONAL AND
LATIN AMERICAN.
"OUR AMERICA" IS AT ITS
CORE A MEDITATION ON WHAT
IT IS THAT WE MEAN WHEN
WE SAY "LATIN AMERICA".
IN IT, MARTI OFFERED A
PROPOSAL FOR CULTURAL
AUTONOMY THAT INCLUDES
EVERYONE ON THE CONTINENT,
AND IN PARTICULAR THOSE
WHOM MARTI CALLS
THE "NATURAL MAN" -
THE INDIGENOUS PEOPLES,
BLACKS, MESTIZOS,
THE OPPRESSED.
WHAT REMAINS OF THE VILLAGE
IN AMERICA MUST AWAKEN.
THESE TIMES ARE NOT FOR
SLEEPING IN A NIGHTCAP,
BUT WITH WEAPONS
FOR A PILLOW:
THE WEAPONS OF REASON,
WHICH CONQUER ALL OTHERS.
BARRICADES OF IDEAS
ARE BETTER THAN
BARRICADES OF STONES.
WITH A LANGUAGE RICH IN
METAPHOR AND MUSICALITY,
MARTI INTRODUCED CUBA
TO THE CONTINENT
AS A FEMININE FIGURE,
A LOVING MOTHER WHO
IS IN MORTAL DANGER.
MARTI CAST HIMSELF AS AN
INTERNATIONAL MEDIATOR,
A VOICE CRYING OUT TO
FELLOW INTELLECTUALS
EXHORTING THEM
TO PAY ATTENTION
TO THE DESTINY OF
THEIR CONTINENT.
ABOVE ALL, "OUR AMERICA"
ENVISIONS A UTOPIA
OF LATIN AMERICAN UNITY.
WITH A SINGLE VOICE THE HYMN
IS ALREADY BEING SUNG;
THE CURRENT GENERATION
IS CARRYING
INDUSTRIOUS AMERICA ALONG
THE ROAD LAID DOWN
BY ITS NOBLE FATHERS;
FROM THE RIO GRANDE TO
THE STRAIT OF MAGELLAN,
THE GREAT SEMI,
ASTRIDE ITS CONDOR,
SPREAD THE SEED OF
THE NEW AMERICA
ON THE ROMANTIC NATIONS
OF THE CONTINENT
AND ON THE SEA'S
SORROWFUL ISLANDS!
THE PROCESS OF GAINING
INDEPENDENCE WAS NOT
INSTANTANEOUS, NOR DID
IT UNFOLD UNIFORMLY
THROUGHOUT
THE CONTINENT.
CERTAIN AREAS, SUCH AS
THE RIO DE LA PLATA
OR THE ANDES,
WERE LIBERATED IN
THE FIRST YEARS OF
THE 19TH CENTURY,
WHILE OTHERS HAD TO
WAIT MUCH LONGER,
SUCH AS MEXICO, GRANTED
INDEPENDENCE IN 1824.
AND ONCE MEXICO HAD
GAINED INDEPENDENCE,
IT THEN HAD TO
SUFFER THROUGH
A BLOODY WAR WITH
THE UNITED STATES,
A WAR IN WHICH IT LOST HALF
ITS ORIGINAL TERRITORY.
SOME AREAS, SUCH
AS CENTRAL AMERICA,
ENGAGED IN A HIGHLY
COMPLEX PATTERN
OF SEPARATION
FROM EUROPE.
HAITI, SWAYED BY THE
INFLUENCE OF THE FRENCH
REVOLUTION, WAS THE FIRST
TERRITORY ON THE CONTINENT
TO PROCLAIM ITSELF
FREE IN 1806,
WHILE CUBA ONLY ACHIEVED
ITS INDEPENDENCE
AT THE BEGINNING OF THE
20TH CENTURY, IN 1902.
THROUGHOUT THE CONTINENT
THERE WAS A LARGE
SLAVE POPULATION,
MUCH OF IT TO BE FOUND
IN CENTRAL
AMERICA AND BRAZIL.
TO A LARGE EXTENT,
THESE REGIONAL ECONOMIES
WERE SUSTAINED
BY SLAVE LABOR.
IN CUBA, THE PRESENCE
OF TOBACCO AND SUGAR
PLANTATIONS LED TO
THE DEVELOPMENT
OF A SOCIAL STRUCTURE
COMPOSED OF
RURAL REFINERIES
AND HACIENDAS.
DUE IN LARGE MEASURE TO
THE TOTAL EXTERMINATION
OF THE INDIGENOUS
PEOPLES, SLAVES WERE
DEEMED NECESSARY TO
PERFORM MANUAL LABOR
IN GRUELING CONDITIONS.
THE BRUTAL REALITY
OF THIS INSTITUTION
GENERATED
FIERCE CRITICISM
IN THE ABOLITIONIST
LITERATURE OF THE TIME.
THE ABOLITIONIST MOVEMENT
BEGAN IN ENGLAND
TOWARDS THE END OF
THE 18TH CENTURY
AND WAS TAKEN UP BY
LATIN AMERICAN WRITERS
WHO UNDERSTOOD THE
POWER OF THE PEN
TO CREATE
SOCIAL CHANGE.
THEIR MISSION WAS TO
AWAKEN PEOPLE TO THE
HORRORS OF SLAVERY AND
TO THE IRONY OF ITS
PERSISTENCE ON A CONTINENT
THAT WAS CALLING ITSELF
"INDEPENDENT".
WITH THE NOTABLE EXCEPTION
OF JUAN FRANCISCO MANZANO'S
"AUTOBIOGRAPHY
OF A SLAVE",
THE NOVEL WAS FOREMOST
AMONG THE GENRES
THAT CARRIED THE
ABOLITIONIST BANNER.
THE CUBAN AUTHOR,
GERTRUDIS GOMEZ DE
AVELLANEDA Y ARTEAGA,
ATTACKED THE INSTITUTION
OF SLAVERY, AND THE
INSTITUTION OF MARRIAGE,
IN A NOVEL ENTITLED
"SAB", PUBLISHED IN 1841.
ITS PROTAGONIST IS A CUBAN
SLAVE IN LOVE WITH A
WHITE WOMAN, WHO IN TURN
MARRIES A WHITE ENGLISHMAN.
THE STORY IS OFTEN
COMPARED TO HARRIET
BEECHER STOWE'S SEMINAL
WORK, "UNCLE TOM'S CABIN",
AND THE CONTROVERSIAL
SUBJECT MATTER
LED TO THE BOOK'S
BEING BANNED IN CUBA.
BUT ARGUABLY THE MOST
IMPORTANT ABOLITIONIST NOVEL
BOTH ARTISTICALLY AND
IN TERMS OF ITS IMPACT,
WAS "CECILIA VALDES"
BY CIRILO VILLAVERDE.
THE FIRST PART WAS
PUBLISHED IN HAVANA
IN 1839, BUT THE FINAL
VERSION DID NOT COME OUT
UNTIL OVER 40 YEARS
LATER, IN 1882.
I REMEMBER WHEN MY MASTER
SENT ME TO CONFESS
MY GUILT ONTO THE
FEET OF A PRIEST.
I ASKED GOD'S
MINISTER
WHAT I COULD DO
TO REACH VIRTUE.
THE SLAVE VIRTUE, HE
ANSWERED, IS TO OBEY AND
BE SILENT, SERVE WITH
HUMILITY AND RESIGNATION
THEIR LEGITIMATE OWNERS,
AND NEVER JUDGE THEM.
THIS ANSWER WAS
NOT ENOUGH FOR ME.
SO WHAT? I THOUGHT,
CAN VIRTUE BE RELATIVE?
IS VIRTUE NOT THE SAME
FOR ALL HUMAN BEINGS?
HAS THE GREAT BOSS FROM
THIS BIG FAMILY MADE
DIFFERENT LAWS FOR THE
ONES BORN WITH BLACK SKIN
THAN THOSE WITH
WHITE SKIN?
DOES NOT EVERYBODY
HAVE THE SAME NEEDS,
PASSIONS AND DEFECTS?
WHY WOULD SOME HAVE
THE RIGHT TO ENSLAVE
AND OTHERS THE
OBLIGATION TO OBEY?
CIRILO VILLAVERDE WAS
BORN IN CUBA IN 1812
IN A SUGAR REFINERY WHERE
HIS FATHER WAS A DOCTOR.
DRAWING ON HIS CHILDHOOD
EXPERIENCES AND IMPRESSIONS
VILLAVERDE'S
NOVEL RECOUNTS IN
EXCRUCIATING DETAIL
THE BRUTAL LIFE
IN A REFINERY
CALLED "LA TINAJA".
VILLAVERDE CASTS HIS
EYE OVER A WIDE-RANGING
SOCIAL STRUCTURE COMPOSED
OF WHITE LANDOWNERS,
FREED AND
MESTIZO SLAVES,
DOOMED LOVERS AND
INCESTUOUS RELATIONSHIPS.
THE NOVEL ADROITLY
WEAVES TOGETHER ELEMENTS
FROM A VARIETY OF
LITERARY TRADITIONS -
FROM ROMANTICISM, REALISM,
THE NOVELS OF WALTER SCOTT,
MELODRAMA, AND
NEWSPAPER SERIALS.
FROM THIS PATCHWORK
VILLAVERDE CRAFTS A STORY
OF IMPOSSIBLE LOVE BETWEEN
A WHITE MAN AND A MESTIZO
WOMAN WHO, WITHOUT KNOWING
IT, ARE HALF-SIBLINGS.
THE MECHANICS OF HIS PLOT
EXPOSE THE HYPOCRISY
OF THE CULTURE AND THE
OPPRESSIVE CRUELTY
DIRECTED TOWARDS SLAVES;
CRUELTY WHICH HE
HIMSELF WITNESSED.
THE LITERATURE OF
ABOLITION DREW ITS
INSPIRATION IN PART FROM
THE FIRST-PERSON TESTIMONY
OF A CUBAN SLAVE NAMED
JUAN FRANCISCO MANZANO.
THE GENESIS OF
HIS AUTOBIOGRAPHY,
WRITTEN TOWARDS THE
END OF THE 1830'S,
HIGHLIGHTS THE COMPLEX
SOCIAL DYNAMIC OF
SUBORDINATION AND DEPENDENCE
THAT MARKED THE TIMES.
MANZANO WAS THE FREQUENT
GUEST OF DOMINGO DEL MONTE,
A WEALTHY CUBAN
INTELLECTUAL FROM HAVANA,
AN ABOLITIONIST AND
SUGAR PLANTATION OWNER
WHO HIMSELF
OWNED MANY SLAVES.
DEL MONTE COMMISSIONED
MANZANO'S AUTOBIOGRAPHY
AND ENSURED THAT IT
ARRIVED IN THE HANDS OF
RICHARD MADDEN, A BRITISH
JUDGE ON THE MIXED COURT -
AN ARBITRATION TRIBUNAL
FOR THE SLAVE TRADE.
MADDEN TRANSLATED
THE TEXT INTO ENGLISH,
LIBERALLY REWRITING,
EDITING, AND CENSORING
ALONG THE WAY, AND
PRESENTED IT AT THE
1840 GENERAL ANTI-SLAVERY
CONVENTION IN LONDON.
IN CUBA, THE MANUSCRIPT
CIRCULATED UNDERGROUND.
THE SECOND PART WAS LOST
AND THE REST REMAINED
IN THE POSSESSION OF
DEL MONTE'S HEIRS.
IT WAS ONLY PUBLISHED
IN ITS ORIGINAL
SPANISH VERSION
IN 1937.
IT IS QUITE ADMIRABLE
OF MY MASTER
THAT SHE CANNOT BE WITHOUT
ME TEN DAYS IN A ROW.
THUS, MY IMPRISONMENTS NEVER
LAST MORE THAN 11 OR 12 DAYS.
SHE'S ALWAYS PORTRAYED
ME AS THE MEANEST ONE
EVER TO BE BORN IN MOLINO,
WHERE SHE SAID I WAS A CREOLE.
THIS WAS ANOTHER KIND OF
MORTIFICATION I HAD.
I LOVED HER DESPITE THE
HARSHNESS OF HER TREATMENT.
DESPITE ITS
CHECKERED HISTORY,
THE "AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF
A SLAVE" REPRESENTS
A UNIQUE TESTIMONY TO
THE EXPLOITATION THAT
SUSTAINED THE COLONIAL
ECONOMY AND SOCIAL ORDER.
AT THE SAME TIME,
IT HIGHLIGHTED
WHAT HAD TO BE
ENDURED IN ORDER TO
ACHIEVE FREEDOM
AND INDEPENDENCE.
"A SLAVE", MANZANO
WROTE, "IS A DEAD SOUL".
THE PLANTATION ECONOMY
MANZANO DEPICTED
WAS AN ALL-ENCOMPASSING
SYSTEM OF CONTROL
THAT MARKED THE SLAVE'S
BODY AS AN OBJECT
TO BE EXPLOITED
FOR ECONOMIC GAIN.
SLAVE OWNERS KEPT THEM
WORKING ALL THE TIME,
NOT ONLY TO ENHANCE
PRODUCTIVITY
BUT TO PREVENT THEM
FROM HAVING FREE TIME
IN WHICH THEY COULD
CONTEMPLATE THEIR FATE.
THIS MIND CONTROL
WAS SO IMPORTANT
TO MAINTAINING ORDER
THAT OVERSEERS OFTEN
FORCED THE SLAVES TO
SING WHILE THEY WORKED.
SILENCE WAS DANGEROUS
BECAUSE IT LED,
INEVITABLY, TO THINKING.
MANZANO'S WRITINGS
ARE INTERESTING
BECAUSE THEY BECOME
EVIDENCE, FIRSTLY,
OF THE FICKLE WAY IN
WHICH THEY WERE TREATED.
THE DIFFICULTIES, THE SENSE
OF BEING TOTALLY DEFENSELESS,
WITHOUT A POSSIBILITY,
HOWEVER MINIMAL,
OF ASSUMING RESPONSIBILITY
FOR ONE'S OWN DESTINY.
MANZANO HAD
DIFFERENT MASTERS
WHO HAD ATTITUDES THAT WERE
OFTEN RADICALLY DIFFERENT.
MANZANO LEARNED HOW
TO READ AND WRITE BY
LISTENING TO CLASSES GIVEN
TO HIS MASTER'S CHILDREN.
MANZANO'S WORK HIGHLIGHTS
THE HORRIFIC CONSEQUENCES
OF THIS
ALL-CONSUMING POWER.
IT DESCRIBES A
SOCIAL SYSTEM
OF ENFORCED
SILENCE, TERROR,
THE SUPPRESSION OF
TRAUMATIC MEMORY,
AND ABJECT SURRENDER
OF BASIC HUMAN DIGNITY.
AND YET THE SPIRIT
SOMEHOW ENDURES.
FROM HIS VANTAGE POINT
IN THE LOWER DEPTHS OF
CUBAN SOCIETY, MANZANO
WROTE WHAT AMOUNTED TO
A LITERARY WRIT
OF HABEUS CORPUS.
USING STUBS OF
LEFT-OVER PENCILS
AND SCRIBBLING ON
ODD BITS OF PAPER,
HE TRANSFORMED HIMSELF
FROM SLAVE TO SCRIBE.
THOUGH LIVING IN A WORLD
OF CHAOS AND SERVITUDE,
MONZANO WAS ABLE TO
CRAFT A SINGULAR TEXT,
A PORTRAIT
OF A SOCIETY,
AND A TESTAMENT TO THE
POWER OF AN INDIVIDUAL WILL.
LATIN AMERICAN LITERATURE
OF THE 19TH CENTURY
IS A STUDY IN
DYNAMIC TENSION;
THE TUG-OF-WAR BETWEEN
MOTHER COUNTRY AND COLONY,
BETWEEN DEPENDENCE
AND INDEPENDENCE,
BETWEEN EUROPEAN AND
INDIGENOUS CULTURES.
THESE ARE THE CONFLICTS
THAT FUEL THE WRITERS
OF THIS PERIOD.
THEIR MISSION, AS THEY
SAW IT, WAS TO DEFINE
A CULTURE BOTH IN
TERMS OF ITS ORIGINS
AND OF THE
HERE AND NOW.
IN THE STRUGGLES
FOR INDEPENDENCE
THAT DOMINATE
THIS PERIOD,
NOVELISTS, ESSAYISTS,
POETS, AND OTHER AUTHORS
FROM ACROSS THE CONTINENT
TOOK UP THE ENORMOUS TASK
OF CONCEIVING
A NEW IDENTITY
- ONE THAT WOULD RETRIEVE
WHAT WAS RESCUABLE
FROM THE COLONIAL PAST.
THEY STRUGGLED WITH A
PRIMEVAL NOTION OF AMERICA
AS A KIND OF UTOPIA, AN
IDEA INHERITED FROM THE
CONQUISTADORS AND
INTERPRETED VARIOUSLY
AS POLITICAL, SOCIAL, OR
EVEN BIBLICAL IN NATURE.
TO FIND ANSWERS TO THE
QUESTIONS PUT BEFORE THEM,
WRITERS OF THIS
PERIOD JOURNEYED TO
THE SPIRITUAL CORE
OF LATIN AMERICA.
WRITING WAS THEIR COMPASS
IN THIS EXPEDITION -
THE ESSAYS, POEMS,
NOVELS, AND SHORT STORIES
THAT LED THE WAY TO A
NEW POLITICAL REALITY.
THE WORK OF THE PEN AND
THE WORK OF THE SWORD
WERE UNITED IN
EACH INDIVIDUAL.
AS A RESULT, THE SEMINAL
WRITERS OF THE FIRST HALF
OF THE 19TH CENTURY
ACTED WITH THE ABSOLUTE
CONVICTION THAT THEY WERE
LAYING OUT THE BASIS
OF A NEW LATIN AMERICAN
CULTURAL IDENTITY.
*